=== PAGE 1 ===
A Look at Financial Dependencies by Means of
Econophysics and Financial Economics
M. Raddanta,b, T. Di Matteoc,b,d
aUniversity for Continuing Education Krems, Department for Knowledge and
Communication Management, 3500 Krems, Austria
bComplexity Science Hub Vienna, Josefst¨adter Straße 39, 1080 Vienna, Austria
cDepartment of Mathematics, King’s College London,
The Strand, London, WC2R 2LS, UK
dCentro Ricerche Enrico Fermi, Via Panisperna 89 A, 00184 Rome, Italy
Abstract
This is a review about ﬁnancial dependencies which merges eﬀorts in econo-
physics and ﬁnancial economics during the last few years. We focus on the
most relevant contributions to the analysis of asset markets’ dependencies,
especially correlational studies, which in our opinion are beneﬁcial for re-
searchers in both ﬁelds. In econophysics, these dependencies can be modeled
to describe ﬁnancial markets as evolving complex networks. In particular we
show that a useful way to describe dependencies is by means of information
ﬁltering networks that are able to retrieve relevant and meaningful informa-
tion in complex ﬁnancial data sets. In ﬁnancial economics these dependencies
can describe asset comovement and spill-overs. In particular, several mod-
els are presented that show how network and factor model approaches are
related to modeling of multivariate volatility and asset returns respectively.
Finally, we sketch out how these studies can inspire future research and how
they contribute to support researchers in both ﬁelds to ﬁnd a better and a
stronger common language.
Keywords:
ﬁnancial networks, asset markets, information ﬁltering
JEL: C58, C22, G12
Email addresses: raddant@csh.ac.at (M. Raddant),
tiziana.di_matteo@kcl.ac.uk (T. Di Matteo)
1
arXiv:2302.08208v1  [q-fin.ST]  16 Feb 2023

=== PAGE 2 ===
1. Introduction
Dependencies in ﬁnancial markets are complex and can be found at many
levels. These markets are inﬂuenced by changing economic fundamentals and
economic policies around the world. There are also numerous interactions
within the asset markets themselves, as well as there is feedback from mar-
ket participants who have varying expectations about future developments.
Many of these processes do not result in measurable streams of data but only
manifest themselves in latent variables, like the observable changes in asset
prices and other ﬁnancial data. In order to understand the functioning of
ﬁnancial markets we therefore have to analyze the structures that are present
in market data, which in turn means to measure and explain their depen-
dencies. This is of course not a new endeavor, the literature in the ﬁeld of
ﬁnancial economics has dealt with this for several decades and has developed
models that explain the diﬀerences in asset returns. Network science has
however brought a new approach to the ﬁeld, as it has enabled us to describe
the dependencies of large sets of assets jointly – and not only factors that
explain diﬀerences.1
Research on the quantitative aspects of ﬁnancial markets has always been
interdisciplinary, at the intersection of economics, mathematics and statis-
tics. With the advent of networks science however, even more ﬁelds became
interested in ﬁnancial markets, especially researchers from physics, computer
science and engineering. This has led to many new and important insights
into ﬁnancial markets, but has also made it more diﬃcult to understand the
diversity of approaches and to evaluate what the most powerful methods are
to study ﬁnancial dependencies. The overview presented in this review there-
fore speciﬁcally aims at showing diﬀerent approaches to measuring ﬁnancial
dependencies across disciplines and connecting them to the foundations in ﬁ-
nancial economics and statistics. This presentation will therefore sometimes
be rather wide in scope than deep. This is intentional because we believe that
interdisciplinary research is typically only impact-full if it reaches researchers
in diﬀerent disciplines, and when it shows that its authors understand and
address research questions across disciplinary borders. We will focus on the
analysis of asset returns, in particular the dependencies between stocks, mea-
sured by their daily price changes. Most of the presented material will how-
1See also Caldarelli (2012) and sec
=== PAGE 3 ===
ever also apply to any other ﬁnancial time series in any other frequency.2 We
are guided by four questions: how are the returns modeled? How are de-
pendencies measured? How are ﬁltering or dimensional reduction achieved?
How are the measurements mapped into a network representation?
Hence, we ﬁrst touch upon cornerstones in ﬁnancial economics and new
approaches from econophysics in section 2. In section 3 we summarize sta-
tistical regularities of asset returns. In section 4 we will explain the basics
of calculating correlations and its challenges together with some of its pit-
falls. Section 5 shows the spectrum of correlation matrices and how it is
related to ﬁnding stocks with similar behaviors. We then proceed to present
recent approaches from econophysics and ﬁnancial econometrics. In section
6 we discuss how networks can be derived from correlation measures and
we introduce two ﬁltering methods that apply structural constraints on the
network. Further we show how clusters and emerging properties can be iden-
tiﬁed in such networks. We then turn to present GARCH models, pairwise
estimation methods, and the variance decomposition approach in sections 7,
8 and 9. In the last section we present some conclusions.
2. The broader picture of ﬁnancial market research
2.1. Cornerstones in ﬁnancial economics
Before discussing recent studies on ﬁnancial dependencies and networks,
it is important to understand the origin of the ﬁeld, together with its main
motives and the scientiﬁc language used.
In ﬁnancial economics there are two important viewpoints when it comes
to asset markets. One is the analysis of market eﬃciency, the other one is the
analysis of the returns of an asset and how it relates to the development of the
market and that of other factors. We will focus on the latter. A well-known
model in this class is the so-called single index model by Sharpe (1963). Here
we assume that a vector of returns ri of an asset i can be described by
ri = αi + βirM + εi ,
(1)
where rM is the market return and βi measures how sensitive the stock’s
return is with respect to the market. αi is a constant, εi is the residual error.
2See also Tsay (2010) and Dacorogna et al. (2001) for general introductions to the
analysis of ﬁnancial market data.
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
Since we assume that the errors are uncorrelated, i.e. cov(εi, εj) = 0 for all
i ̸= j, any correlation between stocks can only come from the market factor
rM.
A slight variation of this idea is the capital market pricing model (CAPM,
Sharpe, 1964; Lintner, 1965), which includes a risk-free reference interest rate
rF, and where the β then describes the risk of an investment relative to the
market portfolio. Additionally, there is also a large literature that discusses
to which extend the βs are changing over time (see for example Bollerslev
et al., 1988; Bodurtha and Mark, 1991; Raddant and Wagner, 2017).
Variations with more factors have been developed over the years, includ-
ing the well-known model by Fama and French (1992) which includes factors
that account for size and value eﬀects.
ri −rF = αi + β1,i(rM −rF) + β2,iSMB + β3,iHML + εi .
(2)
Here, β1 measures the sensitivity of a stock to market risk. β2 and β3
measure the sensitivity to the factors SMB (Small Minus Big) and HML
(High Minus Low).
These factors represent the average return of stocks
with certain characteristics in terms of ﬁrm size, value, and growth. Hence,
implicitly this model assumes that stocks can be clustered according to these
three characteristics.
While much of the diﬀerences in asset returns can be attributed to the
actions and performance of the ﬁrms themselves, there is also ample evi-
dence for the inﬂuence of investors. They sometimes evaluate stocks with
certain characteristics in a too homogeneous way, disregard diﬀerences and
thus inﬂuence stock prices (Barberis et al., 2005; Green and Hwang, 2009).
Investors are also not always good in spotting ﬁrms that are economically
linked, thus missing opportunities to predict returns (Cohen and Frazzini,
2008).
It is important to note that the analysis of the comovement on the global
level uses more aggregated data (see, e.g., Rigobon, 2003). Most approaches
have focused on the analysis of stock market indices or other smaller samples
including sectoral indices. A wide range of methods has been applied, among
these are unit root and cointegration tests, vector autoregression models,
correlation-based tests (Forbes and Rigobon, 2002; Fry et al., 2010), causality
tests (Billio et al., 2012), multivariate GARCH models (Engle, 2002), and
models of variance decomposition (Diebold and Yilmaz, 2009). We will have
a closer look at the latter in the following sections.
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
Another aspect in the literature about ﬁnancial market dependencies is
the question about its determinants (Bracker et al., 1999). Studies often ﬁnd
that structural similarity of the countries’ economies explains only partially
the level of comovement of their ﬁnancial markets. This resulted in a de-
bate about the inﬂuence of global sectoral factors (Dutt and Mihov, 2013;
Bekaert et al., 2009, 2011). Previous results hint at an increase in the im-
portance of these factors. Forbes and Chinn (2004) ﬁnd that cross-country
factors and global sectoral factors both are important determinants of stock
returns. They also note that changes in global linkages over time might make
it diﬃcult to disentangle diﬀerent inﬂuences on asset market comovement.
2.2. Statistical physics, econophysics, and complex networks
The contribution of statistical physics and the development of econo-
physics approaches have much to do with the data revolution in social science
and economics (see also Pentland, 2014; Kutner et al., 2019; Caldarelli et al.,
2018; Steinbacher et al., 2021).
Large-scale investigations on the scaling-
properties of asset returns (Plerou et al., 1999, see also section 3) opened the
ﬁeld for many similar investigations of ﬁnancial data (Mantegna and Stanley,
1999; Bouchaud and Potters, 2009b). These approaches have rather quickly
led to the realization that important challenges in the ﬁeld are the dependen-
cies of ﬁnancial data and the complexity of the ﬁnancial system in general
(Laloux et al., 1999; Plerou et al., 2002).
Over the course of a decade the analysis of the cross-correlations of asset
returns has developed into an analysis of asset markets seen as complex net-
works, studied with techniques from network theory (Mantegna, 1999; Song
et al., 2011a). This has been accompanied by a general inﬂux of network sci-
ence into the analysis of ﬁnancial markets in general, fueled of course by the
ﬁnancial crisis that started in 2008 (Bardoscia et al., 2021; Summer, 2013;
Acemoglu et al., 2015; Battiston et al., 2016; Elliott et al., 2014). Further ex-
tensions in the methodology are the analyses of bi-partite networks, systems
with couplings, and multiple layers of networks (Tumminello et al., 2011;
Gualdi et al., 2016; Buldyrev et al., 2010).
Describing the details of this evolution is outside the scope of this paper.
It however shows that collaboration across disciplines is happening, especially
when important problems arise to which established models h
=== PAGE 6 ===
3. Preliminaries about asset returns
Dependencies between ﬁnancial assets are mostly analyzed based on their
log daily returns ri,t, which are calculated from the stock prices pi,t of asset
i at the days t and t −1
ri,t = ln pi,t −ln pi,t−1 ,
(3)
where i = 1, . . . , N and t = 1, . . . , T. N denotes the number of stocks, T
denotes the number of observations, in this case these correspond to trading
days.
Daily closing prices are the most common data used in the analysis of as-
set returns. For some applications, e.g. when diﬀerent markets are involved
and trading hours are not perfectly aligned, lower frequencies, for example
weekly returns, can be used. Note that the use of logarithmic returns al-
lows to calculate these by summation of the higher frequency returns. On
the other end, there is a trend towards the use of higher frequency data in
the trading industry that utilizes advances in scalable computing and often
employs machine learning.
For most of the following analyses we use daily data covering the time
period from April 2006 until March 2021 (T = 3, 775 trading days) for N =
404 stocks that are constituents of the S&P 500 index. Three exemplary
time series of daily prices and returns are plotted in the left panels of ﬁgure
1. For the purpose of comparison we plot normalized prices ˜p, such that
˜pi,t = pi,t
pi,1
.
(4)
While stock prices show generally some upward trend in the long run, we
can see that the returns shown in the bottom left panel ﬂuctuate around zero
with some visible spikes and clusters.
The volatility of returns can be deﬁned by their sample variance ˆσ2 as
ˆσ2 =
1
T −1
T
X
t=1
(rt −¯r)2 .
(5)
One can also deﬁne a variance in terms of the expectation of the time
series. A common notation is to state that
σ2 = ⟨r2⟩−⟨r⟩2 ,
(6)
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
2008
2012
2016
2020
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
returns
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
autocorrelations
all
Exxon
AT&T
Coca Cola
10 -4
10 -3
10 -2
10 -1
10 0
10 -4
10 -3
10 -2
10 -1
10 0
complementary CDF of returns
2008
2012
2016
2020
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
normalized price
Exxon
AT&T
Coca Cola
time
lag (days)
time
|r|
ri,t
˜pi,t
ACF (|r|)
P>(|r|)
Figure 1: Daily stock returns and their properties.
The top left panel shows the normalized stock price ˜p for three stocks over time.
The bottom left panel shows the corresponding daily returns of these three stocks
(two of them plotted with an oﬀset of ±0.2). The top right panel shows com-
plementary CDFs (CCDFs) of absolute returns on log-log scales for the three
stocks, as well as the CCDF for all stocks (black line, with the CCDF = 1 −F(x),
where F(x) = Pr[X ≤x]).
The bottom right panel shows the corresponding
auto-correlations dependent on the lag in days.
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
where ⟨⟩denote the expectation.
There are also instances where |r|
or r2 are used as measures for volatility.
This is of course motivated by
the fact that ⟨r⟩is typically close to zero and that the intercept of r is in
many models estimated separately from the volatility component (more on
volatility models in section 7).
Hence, one aspect of the returns is that their distributions are non-
Gaussian, heavily skewed, and fat-tailed. In fact, the tail of these distri-
butions is well represented by a power-law, in our case with an exponent of
2.94, as can be seen in the top right panel of ﬁgure 1 (see also Plerou et al.,
1999).
Another aspect of the returns is that the volatility is not constant over
time. Times with high volatility are often followed by more high volatility.
This phenomenon is also called long memory (see also Cont, 2001).
We
can measure this aspect by calculating the autocorrelations, which are the
correlations of the time series with lagged versions of itself. Their entirety
is also called the autocorrelation function (ACF), which is shown in the
bottom right panel of ﬁgure 1. The autocorrelations of the absolute returns
are typically signiﬁcantly positive for more than 100 days (Ding et al., 1993).
Hence, while we cannot forecast tomorrow’s stock prices, some information
about tomorrow’s volatility is included in today’s prices.
These ﬁndings are important for two reasons. First, because they inﬂu-
ence how we can analyze the time series of returns and their dependencies.
The changing volatility can make it diﬃcult to determine whether two time
series are in fact signiﬁcantly related. Properties of the distribution of stock
returns imply that many parametric tests do not apply for this data. The
second aspect of these ﬁndings is that they have of course been discussed in
streams of literature in diﬀerent ﬁelds and that it is therefore important to
understand what the state of the art models are that deal with them – so
that future research on ﬁnancial networks can beneﬁt from and contribute
to them.
4. Correlations of asset returns
Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient is the most common measure to describe
correlations that are linear. For each pair of stocks i and j it can be calculated
as
8

